# pymmcore-gui

This is a stub repo for discussing a unified effort towards a GUI application
for [`pymmcore-plus`](https://github.com/pymmcore-plus/pymmcore-plus) &
[`pymmcore-widgets`](https://github.com/pymmcore-plus/pymmcore-widgets)

<details>

  <summary><em>For developers</em></summary>

  <h2>This repo now contains a working GUI prototype ðŸŽ‰ðŸš€</h2>

  See [CONTRIBUTING](CONTRIBUTING.md) for local setup instructions.

  You can download the latest nightly bundled applications [here](https://nightly.link/pymmcore-plus/pymmcore-gui/workflows/bundle/main)

</details>

## Goals (and non-goals) of unification

### Goals

- Provide a napari-independent GUI for controlling micro-manager via
  pymmcore-plus (i.e. pure python micro-manager control).  We'd like to have a
  primary application that we can point interested parties to (rather than
  having to describe all the related efforts and explain how to compose
  pymmcore-widgets directly).
- Avoid duplicate efforts.  While independent related projects are excellent in
  that they allow rapid exploration and experimentation, we'd like to be able to
  share the results of these efforts.  In some ways that is done via
  pymmcore-widgets, but all of the application level stuff (persistence of
  settings, complex layouts, coordination of data saving, viewing & processing)
  is explicitly not part of pymmcore widgets.
- Establish patterns for persistence and application state.

### Non-Goals

- Working on a shared application is *not* meant to discourage independent
  experimentation and repositories.  (One of the real strengths in doing this
  all in python is the ease of creating custom widgets and GUIs!).  One possible
  pattern would be forks & branches off of a main central repository.

## Purpose of this repo

For now, this serves as place to store TODO issues and discussion items.  Please
open an issue if you are interested, (even just to say hi! ðŸ™‚)

## Existing Efforts

### napari-micromanager

<img width="1840" alt="napari-micromanager"
src="https://github.com/pymmcore-plus/napari-micromanager/assets/1609449/e1f395cd-2d57-488e-89e2-b1923310fc2a">

An initial effort towards a pure python micro-manager gui based on the
pymmcore-plus ecosystem was
[napari-micromanager](https://github.com/pymmcore-plus/napari-micromanager). It
uses [napari](https://github.com/napari/napari) as the primary viewer, and
[pymmcore-widgets](https://github.com/pymmcore-plus/pymmcore-widgets) for most
of the UI related to micro-manager functionality. It still works and will
continue to be maintained for the foreseable future, but we are also interested
in exploring options that do not depend on napari.

One candidate to replace the viewing functionality provided by napari is
[`ndv`](https://github.com/pyapp-kit/ndv), a slim multi-dimensional viewer with
minimal dependencies.  Two experimental efforts exist to build a micro-manager
gui using ndv

### micromanager-gui

<img width="1840" alt="Screenshot 2024-06-03 at 11 49 45â€¯PM"
src="https://github.com/fdrgsp/micromanager-gui/assets/70725613/d8148931-1153-405e-96d6-67abe57f88a3">

[micromanager-gui](https://github.com/fdrgsp/micromanager-gui) is a standalone
application written by Federico Gasparoli
([@fdrgsp](https://github.com/fdrgsp)), and currently lives in federico's
personal org while we experiment with it.

### pymmcore-plus-sandbox

<img width="1190" alt="Screenshot 2024-10-13 at 2 50 57â€¯PM"
src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cd1d81aa-1bab-48ca-ad31-420dc08e72a5">

[`pymmcore-plus-sandbox`](https://github.com/gselzer/pymmcore-plus-sandbox) is
another experimental standalone GUI written by Gabe Selzer
([@gselzer](https://github.com/gselzer) with input from
[@marktsuchida](https://github.com/marktsuchida).  One initial goal here is to
create a main window that looks very similar to the java based MMStudio (which
would make it familiar to existing users of the java ecosystem).

### LEB-EPFL

Willi Stepp ([@wl-stepp](https://github.com/wl-stepp)) has been an active
contributor to pymmcore-widgets and uses some of these widgets in his
event-driven microscopy controllers.
